---
layout: post
title:  VBA 实现数据匹配选择
category: 学习
tags:  软件学习
keywords: 
description: 
---

Since the university graduation,I hardly ever use R or Python,in most cases,I was confronted with a large number of documents,therefore,it seems that skillfully using MS Office software is more important.

Last week,our leader gave me an assignment to fuzzy matching data and allow user to choose for himself in Excel,I think programming based on VBA is the best approach to achieve this goal.Although I have already forgotten knowledge of VBA,I still have to compelte this function in the time available.With the language foundation and baidu,I successfully finished task with working overtime,without pay.In this paper I make a file for the sake of future review.

In general,we can firstly use dictionary function to match data,then,adding the drop-menu to each cell by data validity,at last,in order to avoid damage to data validity,we can disabled the paste function of some columns.

In practice,I creat a button not an active commandbutton to avoid some unknow bugs! So I would write some macro code as follows.

This section provide fuzzy matching and drop-down menu function.

    Sub match data()
        Dim d As Object, cell As Range, arr, brr(), i&, j%
        ActiveSheet.Unprotect
        Sheets("code1").Range("F5:M65536").NumberFormatLocal = "@"
        Set d = CreateObject("scripting.dictionary") 'set dictionary
        arr = Sheets("Sheet1").Range("a2").CurrentRegion 'select non-empty region
        For i = 2 To UBound(arr) 'arr(1,1) is the title information
            If d.exists(arr(i, 1)) Then
                d(arr(i, 1)) = Array(d(arr(i, 1))(0) & "," & arr(i, 2))
            Else
                d(arr(i, 1)) = Array(arr(i, 2))
            End If
        Next
        arr = Sheets("code1").Range("f6:f" & [F65536].End(xlUp).Row)
        ReDim brr(1 To UBound(arr), 1 To 2)
        For i = 1 To UBound(arr)
            If d.exists(arr(i, 1)) Then
                    brr(i, 1) = arr(i, 1)
                    brr(i, 2) = d(arr(i, 1))(0)
            End If
        Next
        Sheets("code").Range("f6").Resize(i - 1, 2) = brr ' add matched data
        For Each cell In Sheets("code1").Range("g6:g" & [G65536].End(xlUp).Row)
            If Len(cell.Text) > 0 Then
                With cell.Validation
                    .Delete
                    .Add xlValidateList, xlValidAlertStop, xlBetween, cell.Text
                End With
            End If
        Next
        Sheets("code1").Range("g6:g" & 4 + i).Locked = False
        Sheets("code1").Range("g" & 5 + i & ":g65536").Locked = True
        Sheets("code1").Range("f6:f" & 4 + i).Locked = True
        Sheets("code1").Range("f" & 5 + i & ":f65536").Locked = False
        For Each cell In Sheets("code1").Range("F6:F" & 4+i) 'unlocked cell 
            If Len(cell.Text) = 0 Then
                cell.Locked = False
                cell.Offset(0, 1).Locked = True
            End If
        Next
        ActiveSheet.Protect
    End Sub

This section remove paste function of specify columns.

    Private Sub Worksheet_SelectionChange(ByVal Target As Range)
        If Target.Column = 7 Then
            Application.CutCopyMode = False
        End If
    End Sub

This section provide colour-coded function to one-to-many relationship helping user find these cells.

    Sub one-to-many()
        Sheets("code1").Unprotect 
        For Each cell In Sheets("code1").Range("K5:K" & [K65536].End(xlUp).Row)
            If cell Like "*,*" Then
                cell.Interior.Color = RGB(255, 0, 0)
            Else
                cell.Interior.ColorIndex = xlNone
            End If
        Next
        Sheets("code1").Protect 
    End Sub

During debugging,we can add the variables or expression to the watch window which shows the current values.This function is useful for us to monitor the status of selected objects. 

##  References

1. [大量数据匹配如何快速](http://club.excelhome.net/thread-1190934-1-1.html)
2. [如何用VBA设置数据有效性？](http://club.excelhome.net/thread-715532-1-1.html)
